I've been coming to Pembrokes for years so when my wife was offered a job in the National
Health Service in Pembrokeshire we actually had a choice between North Wales on the Cleme
Peninsula or Pembrokeshire. We chose Pembrokeshire because I'd fallen in love with it over the
years climbing. I used to live in Cardiff in Swansea so coming down here rock climbing
I had a great affection for the place anyway and a lot of good memories. Then we moved
down and we were actually living in Manabir in a rented accommodation there and I can still
vividly remember being in tears coming down that week we'd settled in we'd just got ourselves
settled into the house and I got up early in the morning walked down to the I think it was early
in the morning and was it in the evening whatever it was I can't remember walking down to the to the
beach to to see you know the beautiful coastline and just being in state of shock I hadn't heard
anything about the the disaster at that point or whether it actually got out I don't know
but we were on Manabir beach and all I can remember my first memory is was the sound not not the
smell actually the smell came on pretty quick afterwards it was just the sound there was a glup
glup glup glup sound of the of the water instead of a sort of a splashing sound and it was
I was just just gobsmacked I mean still makes me feel a little bit emotional now I just remember
looking at this blackness and on the the rocks and on the seashore and and then I could smell it
but it was the it was the I guess there was maybe there's a selfish side to this that I was just
thinking oh my god that's we're screwed you know I'd come here to to be an instructor and to
teach climbing and and and to be a climber and I just thought that's it it's all over for me I just
thought the oil on the rocks wouldn't be able to climb because my gear would get damaged I wondered
how far up it had gone up the cliffs because the tidal range in in Pembrokeshire is huge you know
especially on spring tides which was happening at the sea empress disaster
the the the oil would have gone a long way up the up the cliff we were able to go climbing
you know pretty much straight away there are some some areas that are you know the climb start 30
30 feet up up the cliff anyway so there wasn't going to be much oil at that level so there
were areas we could go climbing in but the the major top areas the St Govans areas
Stankpole, Mowing Word and anything that was down at sea level were were pretty badly affected
and the zones like Huntsman's Leap and Stankpole were particularly affected because you the the
storms couldn't get in there to wash the oil out so I remember that that climbers were
were asked to go into Huntsman's Leap and and look and if I remember correctly I remember
a big crane lifting the boulders out of Huntsman's Leap and climbers wiped them all down with rocks
and we put them back into the zone again and I remember losing climbing ropes because of the oil on them
having some of my slings rock climbing slings got contaminated and losing those
I remember getting oil on my my rock shoes rock climbing shoes quite a few times because
stuff would go into the back of cracks and and holes and things like that and that that's where
the problems were and of course when you go climbing you you just put your ropes down on the
floor and you know the oil had gone underneath the boulders whilst it looked superficially clean
as you kicked the boulders the sticky tarry oil would would get onto your equipment